**Discussion Post 4**

The Dao of Liberation: Zhuangzi's Critique of Conventional Society and His
Mystical Solution

For Zhuangzi, what humanity most fundamentally gets wrong is in creating
artificial oppositions and conventional values that condemn us to endless
suffering and effort. The key diagnosis attributed to Zhuangzi is made by
Watson: humans have saddled themselves with the "baggage of conventional
values" and "conventional concepts of right and wrong, good and bad, life and
death" (Watson, p. 4). At the heart society’s ills is the desire to affix labels
of good or bad; want or don’t want to the point that according to Zhuangzi we
are all living in a "diseased, fear-struck condition of mankind" (Watson, p. 5).
It’s this artificial system of values that has sparked all the clashings and
competings and panickings that characterize the human experience. Whereas
Confucians believe moral cultivation is the cure, for Zhuangzi conventional
morality is the malady, dividing the natural unity of existence into artificial
categories, leading to endless disagreement about what is right or wrong. Even
our most fundamental conception of self and the world, as he reveals through his
well-known butterfly dream, may itself be a hubristic contrivance (Watson, p.
48).

Zhuangzi’s answer is radical emancipation through what he terms "free yourself
from the world" – not to escape in a literal sense but to live free of societal
judgment and purposeful effort (Watson, p. 4). The person of understanding will
practice "inaction," which Watson explains as "a course of action that is not
founded upon any purposeful motives of gain or striving" but instead flows
spontaneously like natural processes (Watson, p. 6). The latter phenomenon is
vividly captured in the story of Cook Ting, who so skillfully butchers the flesh
of an ox that mastery supplants conscious practice and the butcher cuts with
pure, effortless motion that is more the "spirit" of butchering than the thought
of a chore (Watson, p. 47). In Zhuangzi, the sage is said to "embraces the ten
thousand things and rolls them into one," by which he means the sage harmonizes
with the Dao by acknowledging the underlying, interlocking relationships behind
superficial differences (Watson, p. 33). For Robinet, this mystical integration
is "based on all being" and achieved through "meditation and ecstasy" rather
than rational analysis (Robinet, p. 33). The sage achieves what Zhuangzi
terms "wandering" (yu), a state in which one "enjoys its delights without ever
becoming attached to any one part of it"(Watson, p. 6).

Although Zhuangzi's message profoundly reveals the restrictions of we think, and
the possible realms that supersede this, I consider the recommendation for
living to be not that realistic for many people within society. His vision
demands a so total detachment from the ordinary organism of human concerns —
including social obligations, moral commitments, and for that matter basic
requirements for survival — that it feels viable only for a lucky, blessedly
unencumbered few who can afford to go underground in this radical way. The very
social conditions that make it possible for certain people to dedicate
themselves to pure contemplation depend on others remaining entangled in a
conventional world of labor and sexing and practical reason. Furthermore, though
Zhuangzi's refutation of strict moral values is refreshingly in contrast to the
Confucian perspective, full dispossession from all kinds of rights and wrongs
might necessarily end up in moral relativism that is blind to real ethical
issues such as injustice and pain. But his teachings have a profound wisdom for
us as a counter to over-attachment to outcomes, status, and fixed thought — not
in living exactly as he did, certainly, but in integrating his insights about
fluidity, spontaneity, and the limitations of human perceptions into our
approach to the world.

### References

Watson, B. (Trans.). (1996). \*Zhuangzi: Basic writings\*. Columbia University
Press.

Robinet, I. (1997). \*Taoism: Growth of a religion\*. Stanford University Press.
